doc/features/cell-validation.md, before:

# Cell Validation

TrinaGrid provides multiple approaches to validation:

1. **Built-in Column Type Validation**: Each column type has built-in validation rules
2. **Custom Column Validation**: Define custom validation rules at the column level
3. **Cell Change Handlers**: Implement validation in cell change event handlers

## Column Type Validation

Each column type in TrinaGrid comes with built-in validation rules that are automatically applied:

### Text Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Name',
  field: 'name',
  type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
)
```

The text column type validates that values are either strings or numbers. Null values are considered invalid.

### Number Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Age',
  field: 'age',
  type: TrinaColumnType.number(
    negative: false, // Disallow negative numbers
    format: '#,##0', // Format pattern
  ),
)
```

The number column type validates:

- Values are numeric
- Negative numbers (can be disabled)
- Format pattern compliance

### Select Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Status',
  field: 'status',
  type: TrinaColumnType.select(
    items: [
      'Pending',
      'In Progress',
      'Completed',
      'Cancelled',
    ],
    onItemSelected: (event) {
      // Handle selection
    },
    enableColumnFilter: true,
  ),
)
```

The select column type validates that values are present in the predefined items list.

### Date Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Birth Date',
  field: 'birthDate',
  type: TrinaColumnType.date(
    format: 'yyyy-MM-dd',
    startDate: DateTime(1900),
    endDate: DateTime.now(),
  ),
)
```

The date column type validates:

- Date format compliance
- Date range (if startDate/endDate specified)
- Valid date values

### Time Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Start Time',
  field: 'startTime',
  type: TrinaColumnType.time(),
)
```

The time column type validates that values match the format `HH:mm` (24-hour format).

## Custom Column Validation

You can define custom validation rules at the column level using the `validator` property:

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Email',
  field: 'email',
  type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
  validator: (value, context) {
    if (value == null || value.toString().isEmpty) {
      return 'Email is required';
    }

    final emailRegex = RegExp(r'^[\w-\.]+@([\w-]+\.)+[\w-]{2,4}$');
    if (!emailRegex.hasMatch(value.toString())) {
      return 'Please enter a valid email address';
    }

    return null; // Return null if validation passes
  },
)
```

### The Validation Context

The validator function receives a `TrinaValidationContext` object that provides access to:

- `column`: The column definition
- `row`: The row containing the cell being validated
- `rowIdx`: The row index
- `oldValue`: The previous value before the change
- `stateManager`: The grid's state manager

This context allows you to create dynamic validators that can access other cells or grid state.

### Cross-Field Validation

Validate a value based on other fields in the same row:

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Confirm Password',
  field: 'confirmPassword',
  type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
  validator: (value, context) {
    final password = context.row.cells['password']?.value;
    
    if (value != password) {
      return 'Passwords do not match';
    }
    
    return null;
  },
)
```

### Complex Validation Rules

Combine multiple validation rules:

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Password',
  field: 'password',
  type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
  validator: (value, context) {
    if (value == null || value.toString().isEmpty) {
      return 'Password is required';
    }

    final password = value.toString();
    
    if (password.length < 8) {
      return 'Password must be at least 8 characters';
    }
    
    if (!password.contains(RegExp(r'[A-Z]'))) {
      return 'Password must contain at least one uppercase letter';
    }
    
    if (!password.contains(RegExp(r'[0-9]'))) {
      return 'Password must contain at least one number';
    }
    
    return null;
  },
)
```

## Handling Validation Failures

You can handle validation failures at the grid level by providing an `onValidationFailed` callback:

```dart
TrinaGrid(
  columns: columns,
  rows: rows,
  onValidationFailed: (event) {
    // Show error message
    showErrorDialog(
      context,
      'Validation Error',
      event.errorMessage,
    );
    
    // Log validation failure
    logger.warning(
      'Validation failed for ${event.column.title}: ${event.errorMessage}',
    );
    
    // You can also access:
    // event.value - The invalid value
    // event.oldValue - The previous value
    // event.row - The row containing the invalid value
    // event.rowIdx - The row index
  },
)
```

## Cell Change Handlers

For more complex validation scenarios, you can still use cell change handlers:

```dart
TrinaCell(
  value: 'username',
  onChanged: (event) async {
    // Show loading indicator
    event.stateManager.showLoading();
    
    try {
      // Perform async validation
      final isAvailable = await checkUsernameAvailability(event.value);
      
      if (!isAvailable) {
        event.stateManager.showSnackBar(
          'Username already taken',
          backgroundColor: Colors.red,
        );
        
        // Revert to previous value
        event.stateManager.changeCellValue(
          event.cell,
          event.oldValue,
        );
      }
    } finally {
      // Hide loading indicator
      event.stateManager.hideLoading();
    }
  },
)
```

## Validation UI

### Error Feedback

When validation fails, you can provide feedback to users through:

#### Method 1: Using the onValidationFailed callback

```dart
onValidationFailed: (event) {
  showSnackBar(
    context,
    event.errorMessage,
    backgroundColor: Colors.red,
  );
}
```

#### Method 2: Using custom cell rendering

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Email',
  field: 'email',
  renderer: (context) {
    final isValid = isValidEmail(context.cell.value);
    
    return Container(
      decoration: BoxDecoration(
        border: Border.all(
          color: isValid ? Colors.transparent : Colors.red,
        ),
      ),
      child: Text(
        context.cell.value.toString(),
        style: TextStyle(
          color: isValid ? Colors.black : Colors.red,
        ),
      ),
    );
  },
)
```

## Best Practices

1. **Use Built-in Validation**: Leverage the built-in validation provided by column types whenever possible
2. **Column-Level Validation**: Use the `validator` property for validation rules that apply to all cells in a column
3. **Cell-Level Validation**: Use `onChanged` handlers for complex validation scenarios or async validation
4. **Clear Feedback**: Provide clear error messages when validation fails
5. **Prevent Invalid States**: Invalid values are automatically prevented from being committed
6. **Performance**: Keep validation logic efficient, especially for large datasets
7. **User Experience**: Show loading indicators during asynchronous validation
8. **Error Recovery**: Provide clear paths for users to correct invalid data
9. **Consistent Validation**: Apply consistent validation rules across similar data types

## Related Features

- [Column Types](column-types.md) - For details on built-in column types and their validation
- [Cell Editing](cell-editing.md) - For more details on cell editing behavior
- [Cell Value Change Handling](cell_value_change_handling.md) - For handling cell value changes
- [Column Renderers](column-renderer.md) - For customizing cell appearance based on validation state

Commit message:

feat: add cancellable onBeforeActiveCellChange event
Add new onBeforeActiveCellChange callback that fires before the active
cell changes, allowing developers to validate data and prevent navigation
if needed. This solves the visual flicker issue when reverting navigation
in onActiveCellChanged.

Key features:
- Returns bool to allow (true) or cancel (false) navigation
- Provides full context (old/new cell and row indices)
- Works for all navigation types (keyboard, mouse, programmatic)
- No visual flicker - prevents navigation before state changes
- Backwards compatible - optional callback

Closes #237

doc/features/cell-validation.md, after:

# Cell Validation

TrinaGrid provides multiple approaches to validation:

1. **Built-in Column Type Validation**: Each column type has built-in validation rules
2. **Custom Column Validation**: Define custom validation rules at the column level
3. **Cell Change Handlers**: Implement validation in cell change event handlers

## Column Type Validation

Each column type in TrinaGrid comes with built-in validation rules that are automatically applied:

### Text Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Name',
  field: 'name',
  type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
)
```

The text column type validates that values are either strings or numbers. Null values are considered invalid.

### Number Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Age',
  field: 'age',
  type: TrinaColumnType.number(
    negative: false, // Disallow negative numbers
    format: '#,##0', // Format pattern
  ),
)
```

The number column type validates:

- Values are numeric
- Negative numbers (can be disabled)
- Format pattern compliance

### Select Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Status',
  field: 'status',
  type: TrinaColumnType.select(
    items: [
      'Pending',
      'In Progress',
      'Completed',
      'Cancelled',
    ],
    onItemSelected: (event) {
      // Handle selection
    },
    enableColumnFilter: true,
  ),
)
```

The select column type validates that values are present in the predefined items list.

### Date Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Birth Date',
  field: 'birthDate',
  type: TrinaColumnType.date(
    format: 'yyyy-MM-dd',
    startDate: DateTime(1900),
    endDate: DateTime.now(),
  ),
)
```

The date column type validates:

- Date format compliance
- Date range (if startDate/endDate specified)
- Valid date values

### Time Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Start Time',
  field: 'startTime',
  type: TrinaColumnType.time(),
)
```

The time column type validates that values match the format `HH:mm` (24-hour format).

## Custom Column Validation

You can define custom validation rules at the column level using the `validator` property:

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Email',
  field: 'email',
  type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
  validator: (value, context) {
    if (value == null || value.toString().isEmpty) {
      return 'Email is required';
    }

    final emailRegex = RegExp(r'^[\w-\.]+@([\w-]+\.)+[\w-]{2,4}$');
    if (!emailRegex.hasMatch(value.toString())) {
      return 'Please enter a valid email address';
    }

    return null; // Return null if validation passes
  },
)
```

### The Validation Context

The validator function receives a `TrinaValidationContext` object that provides access to:

- `column`: The column definition
- `row`: The row containing the cell being validated
- `rowIdx`: The row index
- `oldValue`: The previous value before the change
- `stateManager`: The grid's state manager

This context allows you to create dynamic validators that can access other cells or grid state.

### Cross-Field Validation

Validate a value based on other fields in the same row:

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Confirm Password',
  field: 'confirmPassword',
  type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
  validator: (value, context) {
    final password = context.row.cells['password']?.value;
    
    if (value != password) {
      return 'Passwords do not match';
    }
    
    return null;
  },
)
```

### Complex Validation Rules

Combine multiple validation rules:

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Password',
  field: 'password',
  type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
  validator: (value, context) {
    if (value == null || value.toString().isEmpty) {
      return 'Password is required';
    }

    final password = value.toString();
    
    if (password.length < 8) {
      return 'Password must be at least 8 characters';
    }
    
    if (!password.contains(RegExp(r'[A-Z]'))) {
      return 'Password must contain at least one uppercase letter';
    }
    
    if (!password.contains(RegExp(r'[0-9]'))) {
      return 'Password must contain at least one number';
    }
    
    return null;
  },
)
```

## Handling Validation Failures

You can handle validation failures at the grid level by providing an `onValidationFailed` callback:

```dart
TrinaGrid(
  columns: columns,
  rows: rows,
  onValidationFailed: (event) {
    // Show error message
    showErrorDialog(
      context,
      'Validation Error',
      event.errorMessage,
    );
    
    // Log validation failure
    logger.warning(
      'Validation failed for ${event.column.title}: ${event.errorMessage}',
    );
    
    // You can also access:
    // event.value - The invalid value
    // event.oldValue - The previous value
    // event.row - The row containing the invalid value
    // event.rowIdx - The row index
  },
)
```

## Cell Change Handlers

For more complex validation scenarios, you can still use cell change handlers:

```dart
TrinaCell(
  value: 'username',
  onChanged: (event) async {
    // Show loading indicator
    event.stateManager.showLoading();
    
    try {
      // Perform async validation
      final isAvailable = await checkUsernameAvailability(event.value);
      
      if (!isAvailable) {
        event.stateManager.showSnackBar(
          'Username already taken',
          backgroundColor: Colors.red,
        );
        
        // Revert to previous value
        event.stateManager.changeCellValue(
          event.cell,
          event.oldValue,
        );
      }
    } finally {
      // Hide loading indicator
      event.stateManager.hideLoading();
    }
  },
)
```

## Validation UI

### Error Feedback

When validation fails, you can provide feedback to users through:

#### Method 1: Using the onValidationFailed callback

```dart
onValidationFailed: (event) {
  showSnackBar(
    context,
    event.errorMessage,
    backgroundColor: Colors.red,
  );
}
```

#### Method 2: Using custom cell rendering

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Email',
  field: 'email',
  renderer: (context) {
    final isValid = isValidEmail(context.cell.value);
    
    return Container(
      decoration: BoxDecoration(
        border: Border.all(
          color: isValid ? Colors.transparent : Colors.red,
        ),
      ),
      child: Text(
        context.cell.value.toString(),
        style: TextStyle(
          color: isValid ? Colors.black : Colors.red,
        ),
      ),
    );
  },
)
```

## Best Practices

1. **Use Built-in Validation**: Leverage the built-in validation provided by column types whenever possible
2. **Column-Level Validation**: Use the `validator` property for validation rules that apply to all cells in a column
3. **Cell-Level Validation**: Use `onChanged` handlers for complex validation scenarios or async validation
4. **Clear Feedback**: Provide clear error messages when validation fails
5. **Prevent Invalid States**: Invalid values are automatically prevented from being committed
6. **Performance**: Keep validation logic efficient, especially for large datasets
7. **User Experience**: Show loading indicators during asynchronous validation
8. **Error Recovery**: Provide clear paths for users to correct invalid data
9. **Consistent Validation**: Apply consistent validation rules across similar data types

## Related Features

- [Cell Navigation Validation](cell-navigation-validation.md) - For preventing navigation away from invalid cells/rows
- [Column Types](column-types.md) - For details on built-in column types and their validation
- [Cell Editing](cell-editing.md) - For more details on cell editing behavior
- [Cell Value Change Handling](cell_value_change_handling.md) - For handling cell value changes
- [Column Renderers](column-renderer.md) - For customizing cell appearance based on validation state
