doc/features/column-types.md, before:

# Column Types

TrinaGrid supports various column types to handle different kinds of data efficiently. Each column type provides specialized rendering, editing, filtering, and sorting capabilities tailored to specific data types.

## Overview

When creating columns for your TrinaGrid, you can specify the column type using the `type` property of `TrinaColumn`. The column type determines:

- How cell values are displayed
- The editor widget used for editing cells
- How values are sorted
- Available filtering options

## Available Column Types

TrinaGrid provides the following built-in column types:

### Text Column

The default column type for displaying and editing text values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Name',
  field: 'name',
  type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
)
```

#### Text Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `textAlign` | `TextAlign` | Alignment of text within cells |
| `maxLines` | `int?` | Maximum number of lines to display |
| `overflow` | `TextOverflow` | How to handle text overflow |
| `enableAutoSize` | `bool` | Whether to automatically resize text to fit |

### Number Column

Specialized for numeric values with formatting options.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Price',
  field: 'price',
  type: TrinaColumnType.number(
    format: '#,##0.00',
    negative: true,
    decimal: true,
  ),
)
```

#### Number Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `format` | `String?` | Number format pattern |
| `negative` | `bool` | Whether to allow negative values |
| `decimal` | `bool` | Whether to allow decimal values |
| `decimalDigits` | `int?` | Number of decimal places to display |
| `thousandSeparator` | `String` | Character used as thousand separator |
| `decimalSeparator` | `String` | Character used as decimal separator |
| `prefix` | `String?` | Text to display before the number (e.g., currency symbol) |
| `suffix` | `String?` | Text to display after the number (e.g., unit) |

### Date Column

For displaying and editing date values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Birthday',
  field: 'birthday',
  type: TrinaColumnType.date(
    format: 'yyyy-MM-dd',
  ),
)
```

#### Date Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `format` | `String` | Date format pattern |
| `startDate` | `DateTime?` | Minimum selectable date |
| `endDate` | `DateTime?` | Maximum selectable date |
| `firstDate` | `DateTime?` | First date visible in calendar |
| `lastDate` | `DateTime?` | Last date visible in calendar |
| `closePopupOnSelection` | `bool` | Whether to close the popup immediately after a date is selected. Defaults to `true`. |
| `popupIcon` | `IconData?` | Custom icon for the popup button (defaults to `Icons.date_range`) |

### Time Column

For displaying and editing time values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Start Time',
  field: 'startTime',
  type: TrinaColumnType.time(
    format: 'HH:mm',
  ),
)
```

#### Time Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `format` | `String` | Time format pattern |
| `minTime` | `TimeOfDay?` | The minimum selectable time. |
| `maxTime` | `TimeOfDay?` | The maximum selectable time. |
| `saveAndClosePopupWithEnter` | `bool` | If true, pressing Enter will save the value and close the popup. |


### DateTime Column

For displaying and editing both date and time values in a single field.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Created At',
  field: 'createdAt',
  type: TrinaColumnType.dateTime(
    format: 'yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm',
    headerFormat: 'MMMM yyyy',
    startDate: DateTime(2023, 1, 1),
    endDate: DateTime(2025, 12, 31),
    popupIcon: Icons.event_available,
  ),
)
```

#### DateTime Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `format` | `String` | DateTime format pattern (defaults to 'yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm') |
| `headerFormat` | `String` | Format for the header in date picker (defaults to 'yyyy-MM') |
| `startDate` | `DateTime?` | Minimum selectable date (optional) |
| `endDate` | `DateTime?` | Maximum selectable date (optional) |
| `applyFormatOnInit` | `bool` | Whether to apply format when initializing (defaults to `true`) |
| `popupIcon` | `IconData?` | Custom icon for the popup button (defaults to calendar icon) |

### Select Column

For selecting a value from a predefined list of items.  

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Status',
  field: 'status',
  type: TrinaColumnType.select(
    items: ['pending', 'in_progress', 'completed', 'cancelled'],
    itemToString: (value) => value.toString().toUpperCase(),
  ),
)
```

#### Select Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `items` | `List<dynamic>` | The list of items to display in the select menu. |
| `itemToString` | `String Function(dynamic)?` | A function that returns the string representation of an item. This is required for search and filtering. |
| `itemToValue` | `dynamic Function(dynamic)?` | A function that returns a unique value for an item, used for comparison and selection. |
| `variant` | `TrinaDropdownMenuVariant` | The select menu variant; one of `select`, `selectWithSearch`, or `selectWithFilters`. |
| `filters` | `List<TrinaDropdownMenuFilter>` | A list of filters to be used when `variant` is `TrinaDropdownMenuVariant.selectWithFilters`. |
| `filtersInitiallyExpanded` | `bool` | Whether the filters section is initially expanded. Defaults to `true`. |
| `emptySearchResultBuilder` | `WidgetBuilder?` | A builder function to create a widget to display when a search yields no results. |
| `emptyFilterResultBuilder` | `WidgetBuilder?` | A builder function to create a widget to display when filtering yields no results. |
| `menuItemBuilder` | `Widget Function(dynamic item)?` | A builder function to create a custom widget for each item in the list. |

### Boolean Column

For displaying and editing boolean values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Active',
  field: 'isActive',
  type: TrinaColumnType.boolean(
    trueText: 'Yes',
    falseText: 'No',
    allowEmpty: false,
    defaultValue: false,
    width: 120,
    popupIcon: Icons.check_box,
    menuItemBuilder: (bool item) => CustomBooleanWidget(value: item),
    onItemSelected: (bool item) {},
  ),
)
```

#### Boolean Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `defaultValue` | `dynamic` | Default value for new cells (defaults to `false`) |
| `allowEmpty` | `bool` | Whether to allow null/empty values (defaults to `false`) |
| `trueText` | `String` | Text to display for true values (defaults to "Yes") |
| `falseText` | `String` | Text to display for false values (defaults to "No") |
| `width` | `double?` | Width of the popup selector |
| `popupIcon` | `IconData?` | Icon to display for opening the popup selector |
| `menuItemBuilder` | `Widget Function(dynamic item)?` | Custom widget builder for rendering boolean values |
| `onItemSelected` | `void Function(dynamic value)?` | Callback when a value is selected |

### Currency Column

Specialized for monetary values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Price',
  field: 'price',
  type: TrinaColumnType.currency(
    symbol: '\$',
    decimalDigits: 2,
  ),
)
```

#### Currency Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `symbol` | `String` | Currency symbol |
| `symbolPosition` | `CurrencySymbolPosition` | Position of currency symbol (before/after) |
| `decimalDigits` | `int` | Number of decimal places |
| `thousandSeparator` | `String` | Character used as thousand separator |
| `decimalSeparator` | `String` | Character used as decimal separator |
| `negativeFormat` | `CurrencyNegativeFormat` | How to format negative values |

### Percentage Column

For displaying and editing percentage values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Completion',
  field: 'completion',
  type: TrinaColumnType.percentage(
    decimalDigits: 1,
    showSymbol: true,
  ),
)
```

#### Percentage Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `defaultValue` | `dynamic` | Default value for new cells (defaults to `0`) |
| `decimalDigits` | `int` | Number of decimal places (defaults to `2`) |
| `showSymbol` | `bool` | Whether to show the % symbol (defaults to `true`) |
| `symbolPosition` | `PercentageSymbolPosition` | Position of % symbol (before/after, defaults to `after`) |
| `negative` | `bool` | Whether to allow negative values (defaults to `true`) |
| `applyFormatOnInit` | `bool` | When the editor loads, it resets the value to formatted value (defaults to `true`) |
| `allowFirstDot` | `bool` | Allow a dot at the beginning when accepting negative numbers (defaults to `false`) |
| `locale` | `String?` | Specifies the numeric locale of the column (if not specified, uses default locale) |
| `decimalInput` | `bool` | When true, users can input direct percentage values (42 for 42%) rather than decimal values (0.42) (defaults to `false`) |

#### Using `decimalInput`

When `decimalInput` is set to `true`, the column will:

1. Accept direct percentage values as input (e.g., 42 for 42%)
2. Display values as percentages (e.g., 42.0%)
3. Store values internally as percentages (not as decimals)

```dart
// Example of a column with decimalInput enabled
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Percentage',
  field: 'percentage',
  type: TrinaColumnType.percentage(
    decimalInput: true,
    decimalDigits: 1,
  ),
)

// Usage with decimalInput: true
TrinaCell(value: 42)  // Displays as "42.0%"

// Regular percentage column (decimalInput: false)
TrinaCell(value: 0.42)  // Displays as "42.00%"
```

### Custom Column

For implementing custom column behavior.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Rating',
  field: 'rating',
  type: TrinaColumnType.custom(
    renderer: (rendererContext) {
      // Custom rendering logic
      return StarRating(rating: rendererContext.cell.value);
    },
    editor: (editorContext) {
      // Custom editing logic
      return StarRatingEditor(
        initialValue: editorContext.cell.value,
        onChanged: (value) => editorContext.onChanged(value),
      );
    },
  ),
)
```

#### Custom Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `renderer` | `Widget Function(TrinaCellRendererContext)` | Custom cell renderer function |
| `editor` | `Widget Function(TrinaCellEditorContext)` | Custom cell editor function |
| `valueParser` | `dynamic Function(dynamic)` | Function to parse cell value |
| `valueFormatter` | `String Function(dynamic)` | Function to format cell value |
| `comparator` | `int Function(dynamic, dynamic)` | Custom comparator for sorting |

## Column Type Configuration

### Default Column Type

You can set a default column type for all columns in your grid:

```dart
TrinaGrid(
  columns: columns,
  rows: rows,
  configuration: TrinaGridConfiguration(
    defaultColumnType: TrinaColumnType.text(),
  ),
)
```

### Type Inheritance

Column types can inherit properties from other column types:

```dart
// Create a base column type with common properties
final baseTextColumn = TrinaColumnType.text(
  textAlign: TextAlign.start,
  maxLines: 2,
);

// Create columns that inherit from the base type
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Description',
  field: 'description',
  type: baseTextColumn.copyWith(
    maxLines: 3,
    overflow: TextOverflow.ellipsis,
  ),
)
```

## Best Practices

1. **Choose the appropriate column type** for your data to leverage built-in formatting, editing, and validation
2. **Use custom column types** when you need specialized behavior not covered by built-in types
3. **Create reusable column type configurations** for consistent appearance across your grid
4. **Consider performance implications** when using complex custom renderers or editors
5. **Provide clear validation feedback** to users when they enter invalid data

## Examples

### Mixed Column Types

```dart
List<TrinaColumn> columns = [
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'ID',
    field: 'id',
    type: TrinaColumnType.number(format: '#'),
    width: 80,
    frozen: true,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Name',
    field: 'name',
    type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
    width: 150,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Birth Date',
    field: 'birthDate',
    type: TrinaColumnType.date(format: 'yyyy-MM-dd'),
    width: 120,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Created At',
    field: 'createdAt',
    type: TrinaColumnType.dateTime(
      format: 'yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm',
    ),
    width: 150,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Salary',
    field: 'salary',
    type: TrinaColumnType.currency(
      symbol: '\$',
      decimalDigits: 2,
    ),
    width: 120,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Completion',
    field: 'completion',
    type: TrinaColumnType.percentage(
      decimalDigits: 1,
      showSymbol: true,
    ),
    width: 100,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Active',
    field: 'isActive',
    type: TrinaColumnType.boolean(),
    width: 100,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Department',
    field: 'department',
    type: TrinaColumnType.select(
      items: ['engineering', 'marketing', 'sales', 'hr'],
    ),
    width: 150,
  ),
];
```

### Custom Rating Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Rating',
  field: 'rating',
  type: TrinaColumnType.custom(
    renderer: (rendererContext) {
      final rating = rendererContext.cell.value as double;
      return Row(
        mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
        children: List.generate(5, (index) {
          return Icon(
            index < rating ? Icons.star : Icons.star_border,
            color: Colors.amber,
            size: 16,
          );
        }),
      );
    },
    editor: (editorContext) {
      return StatefulBuilder(
        builder: (context, setState) {
          double rating = editorContext.cell.value ?? 0.0;
          return Row(
            mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
            children: List.generate(5, (index) {
              return IconButton(
                icon: Icon(
                  index < rating ? Icons.star : Icons.star_border,
                  color: Colors.amber,
                ),
                onPressed: () {
                  setState(() {
                    rating = index + 1.0;
                    editorContext.onChanged(rating);
                  });
                },
                iconSize: 24,
                padding: EdgeInsets.zero,
                constraints: BoxConstraints(minWidth: 24, minHeight: 24),
              );
            }),
          );
        },
      );
    },
  ),
  width: 150,
)
```

## Related Features

- [Column Renderers](column-renderer.md) - For more advanced column rendering
- [Cell Editing](cell-editing.md) - For more details on cell editing behavior
- [Cell Validation](cell-validation.md) - For validating cell input
- [Column Filtering](column-filtering.md) - For filtering data based on column values
- [Column Sorting](column-sorting.md) - For sorting data based on column values

Commit message:

feat: implement TrinaColumnType.custom() for complex object storage (#312)
Add custom column type that allows storing any value (maps, custom classes, etc.)
in cells with optional callbacks for validation, comparison, and display.
Includes demo screen, updated docs, and unit tests.

doc/features/column-types.md, after:

# Column Types

TrinaGrid supports various column types to handle different kinds of data efficiently. Each column type provides specialized rendering, editing, filtering, and sorting capabilities tailored to specific data types.

## Overview

When creating columns for your TrinaGrid, you can specify the column type using the `type` property of `TrinaColumn`. The column type determines:

- How cell values are displayed
- The editor widget used for editing cells
- How values are sorted
- Available filtering options

## Available Column Types

TrinaGrid provides the following built-in column types:

### Text Column

The default column type for displaying and editing text values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Name',
  field: 'name',
  type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
)
```

#### Text Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `textAlign` | `TextAlign` | Alignment of text within cells |
| `maxLines` | `int?` | Maximum number of lines to display |
| `overflow` | `TextOverflow` | How to handle text overflow |
| `enableAutoSize` | `bool` | Whether to automatically resize text to fit |

### Number Column

Specialized for numeric values with formatting options.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Price',
  field: 'price',
  type: TrinaColumnType.number(
    format: '#,##0.00',
    negative: true,
    decimal: true,
  ),
)
```

#### Number Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `format` | `String?` | Number format pattern |
| `negative` | `bool` | Whether to allow negative values |
| `decimal` | `bool` | Whether to allow decimal values |
| `decimalDigits` | `int?` | Number of decimal places to display |
| `thousandSeparator` | `String` | Character used as thousand separator |
| `decimalSeparator` | `String` | Character used as decimal separator |
| `prefix` | `String?` | Text to display before the number (e.g., currency symbol) |
| `suffix` | `String?` | Text to display after the number (e.g., unit) |

### Date Column

For displaying and editing date values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Birthday',
  field: 'birthday',
  type: TrinaColumnType.date(
    format: 'yyyy-MM-dd',
  ),
)
```

#### Date Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `format` | `String` | Date format pattern |
| `startDate` | `DateTime?` | Minimum selectable date |
| `endDate` | `DateTime?` | Maximum selectable date |
| `firstDate` | `DateTime?` | First date visible in calendar |
| `lastDate` | `DateTime?` | Last date visible in calendar |
| `closePopupOnSelection` | `bool` | Whether to close the popup immediately after a date is selected. Defaults to `true`. |
| `popupIcon` | `IconData?` | Custom icon for the popup button (defaults to `Icons.date_range`) |

### Time Column

For displaying and editing time values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Start Time',
  field: 'startTime',
  type: TrinaColumnType.time(
    format: 'HH:mm',
  ),
)
```

#### Time Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `format` | `String` | Time format pattern |
| `minTime` | `TimeOfDay?` | The minimum selectable time. |
| `maxTime` | `TimeOfDay?` | The maximum selectable time. |
| `saveAndClosePopupWithEnter` | `bool` | If true, pressing Enter will save the value and close the popup. |


### DateTime Column

For displaying and editing both date and time values in a single field.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Created At',
  field: 'createdAt',
  type: TrinaColumnType.dateTime(
    format: 'yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm',
    headerFormat: 'MMMM yyyy',
    startDate: DateTime(2023, 1, 1),
    endDate: DateTime(2025, 12, 31),
    popupIcon: Icons.event_available,
  ),
)
```

#### DateTime Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `format` | `String` | DateTime format pattern (defaults to 'yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm') |
| `headerFormat` | `String` | Format for the header in date picker (defaults to 'yyyy-MM') |
| `startDate` | `DateTime?` | Minimum selectable date (optional) |
| `endDate` | `DateTime?` | Maximum selectable date (optional) |
| `applyFormatOnInit` | `bool` | Whether to apply format when initializing (defaults to `true`) |
| `popupIcon` | `IconData?` | Custom icon for the popup button (defaults to calendar icon) |

### Select Column

For selecting a value from a predefined list of items.  

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Status',
  field: 'status',
  type: TrinaColumnType.select(
    items: ['pending', 'in_progress', 'completed', 'cancelled'],
    itemToString: (value) => value.toString().toUpperCase(),
  ),
)
```

#### Select Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `items` | `List<dynamic>` | The list of items to display in the select menu. |
| `itemToString` | `String Function(dynamic)?` | A function that returns the string representation of an item. This is required for search and filtering. |
| `itemToValue` | `dynamic Function(dynamic)?` | A function that returns a unique value for an item, used for comparison and selection. |
| `variant` | `TrinaDropdownMenuVariant` | The select menu variant; one of `select`, `selectWithSearch`, or `selectWithFilters`. |
| `filters` | `List<TrinaDropdownMenuFilter>` | A list of filters to be used when `variant` is `TrinaDropdownMenuVariant.selectWithFilters`. |
| `filtersInitiallyExpanded` | `bool` | Whether the filters section is initially expanded. Defaults to `true`. |
| `emptySearchResultBuilder` | `WidgetBuilder?` | A builder function to create a widget to display when a search yields no results. |
| `emptyFilterResultBuilder` | `WidgetBuilder?` | A builder function to create a widget to display when filtering yields no results. |
| `menuItemBuilder` | `Widget Function(dynamic item)?` | A builder function to create a custom widget for each item in the list. |

### Boolean Column

For displaying and editing boolean values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Active',
  field: 'isActive',
  type: TrinaColumnType.boolean(
    trueText: 'Yes',
    falseText: 'No',
    allowEmpty: false,
    defaultValue: false,
    width: 120,
    popupIcon: Icons.check_box,
    menuItemBuilder: (bool item) => CustomBooleanWidget(value: item),
    onItemSelected: (bool item) {},
  ),
)
```

#### Boolean Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `defaultValue` | `dynamic` | Default value for new cells (defaults to `false`) |
| `allowEmpty` | `bool` | Whether to allow null/empty values (defaults to `false`) |
| `trueText` | `String` | Text to display for true values (defaults to "Yes") |
| `falseText` | `String` | Text to display for false values (defaults to "No") |
| `width` | `double?` | Width of the popup selector |
| `popupIcon` | `IconData?` | Icon to display for opening the popup selector |
| `menuItemBuilder` | `Widget Function(dynamic item)?` | Custom widget builder for rendering boolean values |
| `onItemSelected` | `void Function(dynamic value)?` | Callback when a value is selected |

### Currency Column

Specialized for monetary values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Price',
  field: 'price',
  type: TrinaColumnType.currency(
    symbol: '\$',
    decimalDigits: 2,
  ),
)
```

#### Currency Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `symbol` | `String` | Currency symbol |
| `symbolPosition` | `CurrencySymbolPosition` | Position of currency symbol (before/after) |
| `decimalDigits` | `int` | Number of decimal places |
| `thousandSeparator` | `String` | Character used as thousand separator |
| `decimalSeparator` | `String` | Character used as decimal separator |
| `negativeFormat` | `CurrencyNegativeFormat` | How to format negative values |

### Percentage Column

For displaying and editing percentage values.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Completion',
  field: 'completion',
  type: TrinaColumnType.percentage(
    decimalDigits: 1,
    showSymbol: true,
  ),
)
```

#### Percentage Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `defaultValue` | `dynamic` | Default value for new cells (defaults to `0`) |
| `decimalDigits` | `int` | Number of decimal places (defaults to `2`) |
| `showSymbol` | `bool` | Whether to show the % symbol (defaults to `true`) |
| `symbolPosition` | `PercentageSymbolPosition` | Position of % symbol (before/after, defaults to `after`) |
| `negative` | `bool` | Whether to allow negative values (defaults to `true`) |
| `applyFormatOnInit` | `bool` | When the editor loads, it resets the value to formatted value (defaults to `true`) |
| `allowFirstDot` | `bool` | Allow a dot at the beginning when accepting negative numbers (defaults to `false`) |
| `locale` | `String?` | Specifies the numeric locale of the column (if not specified, uses default locale) |
| `decimalInput` | `bool` | When true, users can input direct percentage values (42 for 42%) rather than decimal values (0.42) (defaults to `false`) |

#### Using `decimalInput`

When `decimalInput` is set to `true`, the column will:

1. Accept direct percentage values as input (e.g., 42 for 42%)
2. Display values as percentages (e.g., 42.0%)
3. Store values internally as percentages (not as decimals)

```dart
// Example of a column with decimalInput enabled
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Percentage',
  field: 'percentage',
  type: TrinaColumnType.percentage(
    decimalInput: true,
    decimalDigits: 1,
  ),
)

// Usage with decimalInput: true
TrinaCell(value: 42)  // Displays as "42.0%"

// Regular percentage column (decimalInput: false)
TrinaCell(value: 0.42)  // Displays as "42.00%"
```

### Custom Column

For storing complex objects (maps, custom classes, etc.) that don't fit the built-in column types.

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Address',
  field: 'address',
  type: TrinaColumnType.custom(
    defaultValue: {'street': '', 'city': ''},
    toDisplayString: (value) => '${value['street']}, ${value['city']}',
    compare: (a, b) => a['city'].compareTo(b['city']),
    isValid: (value) => value is Map && value.containsKey('city'),
  ),
)
```

By default, all values are considered valid, sorting uses `toString()` comparison,
and display text uses `toString()`. All callbacks are optional.

For custom rendering, combine with `TrinaColumn.renderer`:

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Rating',
  field: 'rating',
  type: TrinaColumnType.custom(
    toDisplayString: (value) => '${value} stars',
    compare: (a, b) => (a as num).compareTo(b as num),
  ),
  renderer: (rendererContext) {
    return StarRating(rating: rendererContext.cell.value);
  },
)
```

#### Custom Column Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `defaultValue` | `dynamic` | Default value for new cells (defaults to `null`) |
| `isValid` | `bool Function(dynamic)` | Validates cell values (defaults to always `true`) |
| `compare` | `int Function(dynamic, dynamic)` | Comparator for sorting (defaults to `toString()` comparison) |
| `toDisplayString` | `String Function(dynamic)` | Converts value to display text (defaults to `toString()`) |

## Column Type Configuration

### Default Column Type

You can set a default column type for all columns in your grid:

```dart
TrinaGrid(
  columns: columns,
  rows: rows,
  configuration: TrinaGridConfiguration(
    defaultColumnType: TrinaColumnType.text(),
  ),
)
```

### Type Inheritance

Column types can inherit properties from other column types:

```dart
// Create a base column type with common properties
final baseTextColumn = TrinaColumnType.text(
  textAlign: TextAlign.start,
  maxLines: 2,
);

// Create columns that inherit from the base type
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Description',
  field: 'description',
  type: baseTextColumn.copyWith(
    maxLines: 3,
    overflow: TextOverflow.ellipsis,
  ),
)
```

## Best Practices

1. **Choose the appropriate column type** for your data to leverage built-in formatting, editing, and validation
2. **Use custom column types** when you need specialized behavior not covered by built-in types
3. **Create reusable column type configurations** for consistent appearance across your grid
4. **Consider performance implications** when using complex custom renderers or editors
5. **Provide clear validation feedback** to users when they enter invalid data

## Examples

### Mixed Column Types

```dart
List<TrinaColumn> columns = [
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'ID',
    field: 'id',
    type: TrinaColumnType.number(format: '#'),
    width: 80,
    frozen: true,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Name',
    field: 'name',
    type: TrinaColumnType.text(),
    width: 150,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Birth Date',
    field: 'birthDate',
    type: TrinaColumnType.date(format: 'yyyy-MM-dd'),
    width: 120,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Created At',
    field: 'createdAt',
    type: TrinaColumnType.dateTime(
      format: 'yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm',
    ),
    width: 150,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Salary',
    field: 'salary',
    type: TrinaColumnType.currency(
      symbol: '\$',
      decimalDigits: 2,
    ),
    width: 120,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Completion',
    field: 'completion',
    type: TrinaColumnType.percentage(
      decimalDigits: 1,
      showSymbol: true,
    ),
    width: 100,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Active',
    field: 'isActive',
    type: TrinaColumnType.boolean(),
    width: 100,
  ),
  TrinaColumn(
    title: 'Department',
    field: 'department',
    type: TrinaColumnType.select(
      items: ['engineering', 'marketing', 'sales', 'hr'],
    ),
    width: 150,
  ),
];
```

### Custom Rating Column

```dart
TrinaColumn(
  title: 'Rating',
  field: 'rating',
  type: TrinaColumnType.custom(
    renderer: (rendererContext) {
      final rating = rendererContext.cell.value as double;
      return Row(
        mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
        children: List.generate(5, (index) {
          return Icon(
            index < rating ? Icons.star : Icons.star_border,
            color: Colors.amber,
            size: 16,
          );
        }),
      );
    },
    editor: (editorContext) {
      return StatefulBuilder(
        builder: (context, setState) {
          double rating = editorContext.cell.value ?? 0.0;
          return Row(
            mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
            children: List.generate(5, (index) {
              return IconButton(
                icon: Icon(
                  index < rating ? Icons.star : Icons.star_border,
                  color: Colors.amber,
                ),
                onPressed: () {
                  setState(() {
                    rating = index + 1.0;
                    editorContext.onChanged(rating);
                  });
                },
                iconSize: 24,
                padding: EdgeInsets.zero,
                constraints: BoxConstraints(minWidth: 24, minHeight: 24),
              );
            }),
          );
        },
      );
    },
  ),
  width: 150,
)
```

## Related Features

- [Column Renderers](column-renderer.md) - For more advanced column rendering
- [Cell Editing](cell-editing.md) - For more details on cell editing behavior
- [Cell Validation](cell-validation.md) - For validating cell input
- [Column Filtering](column-filtering.md) - For filtering data based on column values
- [Column Sorting](column-sorting.md) - For sorting data based on column values
